how could the death of the queen affect
the boundaries between english
communities around the world
how could the death of the queen affect
the boundaries between english-speaking
communities around the world
well i suppose it could go one of two
ways you know one is that
and this would be a terrible thing it's
such
it's such bad timing in some sense you
know i think for
for what happened today to have happened
um i'm a great admirer of the
of the constitutional monarchy system i
think there's a wisdom about it
especially the way that
your country has managed it which is
more
it's worked better than
how any other country has managed it
maybe ever that's really something you
know there are obviously monarchical
systems constitutional monarchies still
left in europe but they're kind of a
pale reflection of what you've got in
the uk
and
when tammy and i were in kentucky
a couple of months ago
we
were invited there by the former
ambassador from the u.s to canada and
she was and her husband were
fundraisers for donald trump um
and
he he he runs a coal mine so you can
imagine why he's republican
and
and so we were we were at the kentucky
derby
which is quite the show the americans
they're very theatrical man they can put
on a show like no one else and the
kentucky derby is definitely a show
people wear the most preposterous
outfits you know
these wild lime green suits and these
amazing sort of victorian costumes for
the for the women and they're all
dressed up there's like 160 000 people
at the racetrack and it's quite the
spectacle and we were up above the
racetrack about three floors in this
glassed-in cafe and uh the second day we
were there
trump was going to come to the cafe to
the restaurant
and i had flown out that morning to give
a commencement address at this
conservative college in northern
michigan and then i flew back
and
just after i got there they closed the
airport so i just got in they closed the
airports because the president is coming
to town
the former president but they still call
him the president and so really the
whole city in some real sense was locked
down
and then
i go out to the
derby back to the derby and just in time
because they're going to lock down the
whole derby so that meant no one 160 000
people no one gets in or out and then
the army came in and there was like 300
guys in camouflage quite armed and they
were taking up their stations and this
is like three hours before trump showed
up and
then the secret service came in and by
that time i had made it upstairs to the
restaurant where tammy was and she'd
been there uh waiting and everyone was
buzzing away about the fact that trump
was coming and
the atmosphere was electric you know and
i thought
sitting there i thought this must have
been what it was like to be well around
the kennedys say in the 1960s that level
of fame i've been around famous people a
lot now and
there are definitely tears of fame you
know there's
there's not famous and that's
normal and then there's
celebrities that are maybe known locally
and nationally and then there are
celebrities that are known
internationally and then there's
celebrities like the queen who everyone
everywhere in the world knows who
among famous people they're hyper famous
and trump is in that category
and he's a very strange
person in that category i would say
because he's not just famous for being
president which is already something
that makes you pretty damn famous but he
was really famous
as a
as a businessman before that
and as a nouveau riche sort of
businessman and as a kind of brash
entrepreneur and a character and he was
very famous for that but then he got
even more famous as a tv celebrity for
like 15 years and that's actually really
hard
you know regardless of what you think
about it ethically or you know whether
you think the kind of entertainment that
he did
that he involved himself in was
worthwhile i don't care about that
that's not my point my point is that
managing that successfully for 15 years
is exceptionally unlikely and difficult
and he was extremely famous as a
consequence and that was sort of laden
on top of his
fame for on the business front and then
he became president
and so
that's a lot of fame man
and when when that much fame surrounds
you your life is very weird and the
probability that people are going to
respond to you
in a normal in the normal way that helps
keep you sane
is very low
especially maybe if you're also an
intimidating person to begin with with a
bit of a proclivity let's say towards
disagreeableness
because maybe then you chase away the
people who would
have enough sense to tell you when you
go a little bit too far
anyways we were up there in the
restaurant the place was just buzzing
and then trump came in and it was you
could just feel the energy the electric
energy and i thought this is not good
this is too much man this is too much
for anybody to bear
and the thing about the monarchy that's
so cool you know in the united states
there's the judiciary and the
legislative branch and the executive
that separation of powers and the checks
and balances that
are part and parcel of that and that's a
bright system and then you also have the
states and they have their power against
the federal government and that stops
anything from becoming too tyrannical in
principle but here and in canada
although less so in canada because we're
you know modern and trying to dispense
with the monarchy modern confused
dim-witted and untraditional
um and casual and careless and then we
have the french english problem which
makes things more complicated on the
monarchical front
you have four divisions
you have executive legislative
judicial
and symbolic
and the monarch holds the symbolic
weight
and that's really smart because it
separates it to some degree from the
political weight you know you see what
happens in the united states is well
first of all is the president tends to
turn into this to the czar
you know because they have this idea in
the united states now like first lady
it's like what the hell is that
we don't have that in canada nobody
knows anything about about justin
trudeau's wife
and that's been the history of of
canadian politicians it's like just
because you're justin trudeau's wife
doesn't mean you're queen but in the
united states it's like well you know
hillary clinton maybe she's queen and
that's
and that's partly because there is that
demand for the symbolic weight that the
leader should manifest
and you also see that to some degree in
the united states which is a star
worshiping culture obviously with the
glitterati and the royalty of hollywood
and it's better put there it's better
put there in the entertainment section
even though that's also somewhat
dangerous because it tends to elevate
actors into
pronouncements of ethical ver
pronouncers of ethical virtues say but
better there than in the political realm
trump he's like king and president all
rolled up into one and that's just too
much
and so
and so i really admire the monarchical
system and i think that
for whatever reason the uk has done a
wonderful job of maintaining that and i
think a very economically canny job too
because i know the economic analysis
indicate that the royal family generates
way more income than they spend you know
because they're a major
and everything they're associated with
here's a major tourist attraction it's
this tradition that you have here this
monarchical tradition is something
that's tremendously attractive to people
who don't have that canadians for
example americans and because it's it's
just it's so theatrical and so unique
and then you had queen elizabeth who
man i mean that's quite the woman there
what how many 13 prime ministers
and so you had someone around to
intimidate all your prime ministers
that's a really good idea and i'm sure
she did a fine job of that you know
and so yeah
you know and you you can imagine you can
imagine how useful it was
psychologically in some sense for
the prime minister who has
monarchical temptations in some sense
like trump did to have to go on a
regular basis to this remarkable person
who'd seen
this immense span of political history
and
confess
in some real sense right and to be
subject to her
cautious and wise judgment because i
think
she was a woman who was traditional and
cautious and wise in the highest degree
and
there were scandals in her family but
like you have a family
if people knew what your family was
doing don't you think there'd be
scandals and so
but she was remarkably free of scandals
over that entire period and that's
that's a hell of a thing to manage for
70 years
and so
well so what will happen now
well that the most likely thing is that
your monarchy will
disintegrate like most of the other ones
have i i'm not saying that will happen
i'm certainly not saying i want it to
happen but because that sort of thing is
so hard to maintain especially in the
modern world and because you need
someone so remarkable to manage it the
probability that you'll get another one
is relatively low
and so i wish
your new king the best that's for sure
but you know maybe
maybe you'll get lucky and maybe your
monarch and maybe with your support
will rise to the occasion and
your country
and the rest of the british commonwealth
will recognize
that what they have in the shared bonds
that unite them
based on english common law and the
great democratic tradition that's so
much a function of this country and this
country really in particular i mean
you're the birthplace of both canada the
us australia new zealand india these
amazing countries these free
democratic productive generous societies
it's quite the accomplishment and i see
in england and europe but in england too
in great britain
such a
such apprehension about that such
refusal to note
the greatness of your country and its
contributions i mean you know
no one
in the united states ever talks about
the fact that the uk was the country
that er
that eradicated slavery
like that's
that only happened once in the whole
history of the of the human race
you know when your country did it it
took 175 years
and a huge economic
yeah
you know it was it was your country and
the great people who
were were spearheading that movement at
the time that established once and for
all
on the political and economic front that
that was not to be tolerated and then
you know it took a while for that idea
to spread everywhere it still hasn't
because there's there's plenty of slaves
in the world the estimate's 30 million
at the moment by the way
but
there are very few people who will come
out forthrightly and say that it's
that it's right that it's okay that you
know might makes right
and your country was definitely one of
the moral forces in the world
the primary moral force on the political
front who established once and for all
that
that was no longer acceptable and so and
and and and yet
mostly what characterizes a fair bit of
self-image in great britain is shame and
you know every country has things to be
ashamed of but not every country also
has things to be proud of
so
so what do we think
what's going to happen with the
commonwealth well
maybe we'll wise up and recognize that
we have something absolutely precious to
guard
and uh
and then maybe we'll guard it
but to do that we're going to have to
defend ourselves against unwarranted
accusations of
of guilt
not that there's not
something to be guilty about you know
because we're all the beneficiaries of
the atrocities of history and we have to
atone for that in our personal behavior
but by the same token man
you're supposed to separate the wheat
from the chaff and not just
call it all chaff and when you look at
your own history you think
we stumbled plenty you know but we still
walked up hill
and you in your country
you can say that more than most
you